Title: Random Language Thoughts
Date: 2020-12-20 17:15
Category: Lila

A few months ago, I started on a new compiler. Originally, I named it "Dash", but I made the mistake of releasing it too early before it was really mature. Oh well. No one really cared, so I still had a blank slate. I had to pause for a few weeks because of school and work, but now that things are winding up, I've been working on it some more. This is probably my favorite project yet. I started to make some breaking syntax changes today, so I made it private until I solidfied things. I do have a development log on this site, which you can check out.

In this post, I'm just writing some random thoughts on programming languages... Its purely a matter of opinion.

### On Languages

Even though I grew up in a C-like language world, in recent times I've begun to drift away somewhat. C/C++/Java/etc are not all bad, but they get a lot of criticism for good reason. I have by no means explored all the different languages, but I have touched on most of the language groups. The languages I have most used are obviously C++, then C, Java, Haskell, Rust, and Ada. I have tried out several others, but those languages are the ones I primarily have used for non-trivial projects.

As languages, Rust and Ada are probably my favorites. I really like Haskell, but its a huge learning curve and doesn't run on as many architectures (part of the reason I went with Rust for my new compiler project is its wide architecture support). I have heard good things about OCaml and Standard ML... Anyway, another post for another time. Anyway, Rust and Ada are my favorites because they are easy to understand, they are a lot of fun to work with, they are safe, they run almost everywhere... They're both just great. For compiler development, Rust is amazing.

Ada is equally as good; I love the language, but there are a few reasons I gravitated towards Rust. The main reason was lack of documentation. There is very little good references on the language other than the spec. AdaCore has done a lot to make that better, but even with the standard library, its still hard to find stuff. And if you run into a weird error, a google search isn't going to lead to much in the same way that it would with C++ or Rust. I try to use Ada when I can, but honestly it can be a little frustrating.

I'm not a big person on trends, but I do think Rust is one of the most viable languages to be developed in a while. In the systems language world, most of the languages that try to "redo" C tend to crash, either because they become incompatible with what exists, or because they do too much (hint hint... C++? D?). The way Rust approaches things leads to clean, workable code. Allow me to underscore that with experience. 

My original compilers were all C++, and I don't maintain any of them anymore. Why? Because I made some not-so-great design choices, and I just can't change anything now. I tried to redo the low-level IR in my extcc compiler (the original one was awful), and I just couldn't; the whole thing broke to point where I really couldn't fix it. That was the last compiler I implemented in C++. I've heard a lot of people complain about how C++ more or less locks you in to whatever your initial design choices are (Linus Torvalds' famous C++ rant has a lot of truth).

And to further underscore that, think about code size. C++ projects can become really hard to maintain once they get to a certain point. My extcc compiler reached about 5000 lines of code before I couldn't do it anymore (actually, I think it was around 1K more back before I tried to replace the original LTAC layer). My current project- the Lila compiler- is roughly 8400 lines of all Rust code, and I've made some huge changes to it that I would never have done in C++. One of these was basically reworking the variable expression builder, which is one of the most complicated parts of the compiler. It was time consuming, but it really wasn't a huge deal. This morning, I made a pretty core change in the syntax, and that wasn't a big deal either. I also love my IRs... Anyway.

I will say though, when it comes to GUI programs, C++ is my language of choice so I can use Qt. You really can't go wrong there.

### 