Title: Digging Out an Old Program
Date: 2020-07-19 11:30
Category: Programming

Yesterday I embarked on a somewhat interesting task: resurrecting one of my old programs. For a while- mainly my last years of high school- I was making a number of desktop applications. Most of them are on my Github profile; my best ones include a text editor, a file explorer, a media player, a backup program, a spreadsheet program, and even a small web browser. Except for two, they were all written in C++ and used the Qt library (one was written in Python using PyQt, and the other was C++/Gtkmm).

Anyway, I was getting frustrated with text editors. Almost as long as I've used Linux, I've been using Linux Mint, or a Linux distro that used the Cinnamon desktop. While not the reason, a big portion of it was the app suite it came with, particularly the text editor. The Linux Mint text editor, Xed, is based on Pluma, the Mate editor, which in turn was based on the old Gedit. The new Gedit is just awful, I don't really like a whole lot of other editors, and the ones I do like are pretty closely tied with their desktop environments. I do like console editors, particularly Nano and to a lesser extent, Vim, but in all honestly, they're not great for productivity. Before you say it, yes I've tried VS Code, and its not my thing. And I hate IDEs.

The solution: I will write my own. That was actually my solution with my phone. I have an Android, and I couldn't find a simple, ad-free notepad that worked and I liked, so I just made my own- and I've been using it for two years. 

Returning to the text editor, I fortunately already had most of it in place, or I probably would have just sucked it up and used either Nano or dealt with pulling in a lot of dependencies. I started my text editor about three years ago as a hobby project, and I updated it on and off for about a year afterward (actually, I think its older than that; I cleared the Git history for it because of some licensing issues- there was a point where I used some GPL libraries, which meant I had to license the program under GPL. I really didn't like that, so I eventually removed them, re-licensed the program, and cleared the history so the old version wouldn't be there. It actually goes deeper as well- the old version got pretty bloated).

Resuming development on a project you started three years ago and didn't touch for over a year is an interesting experience. Obviously, there was a lot of bad code in it. There still is- I went crazy with global variables, which is one thing I still need to clean up. There was also just a lot of bloat and useless features, extra files, and stuff that wasn't quite working. 

The first thing I did was version off the original to a separate branch and tag it. Then I went through and deleted a lot of code. This time around, the focus is mainly making this an editor that I like and can use with minimal issue across platforms, so I removed things I kinda thought were extra. I also did remove one dependency that was frankly a little broken (it was mine... yeah...), but I kept the others. This morning, I added a new side panel feature that displays all the files and folders in the current directory- something Xed/Pluma/Gedit have that is a great feature when you are working on projects (this was a post-cleanup task).

I'm going to try using it this week during work and see how it goes. I added the new feature using the editor, and so far I like it. Hopefully it goes well so I can carry it around with me. 


