Title: Developing Without the Internet
Date: 2020-07-23 08:30
Tags: Work, Random
Category: Random

So we are on the second day of no internet… We’re hoping to get it back in a few hours, but if not, it won’t be until Saturday. I’ve been trying to get my life to the point where not having internet is an inconvenience rather than a tragedy. Right now, its close to that because of my job.

Anyway, I started this morning working on bug-fixing the text editor I use for job and personal projects. This particular editor uses C++ and Qt. Usually I use the Qt online docs- which are super nice- but obviously I couldn’t use them. There is another solution for C and C++ users to develop offline.

If you are a C or C++ developer, you can skip this paragraph. If not, you should read it. Many modern programming languages use the concept of modules for libraries and larger projects. And this is nice, but it has a slight downside. Oftentimes, the module is the translation unit, so the logic and the definitions are in the entire file. In C/C++, a project consists of header files and source files. Header files contain function declarations- and good header files have comment blocks that contain the documentation for that function (glibc comes to mind…). This is really nice because you can theoretically use these in place of online documentation when you are working with a library.

So that’s what I did. I picked through my system and found all the Qt header files, and was able to get all my bugs I had listed fixed up. It was a slight pain browsing through the headers, but it actually wasn’t too bad since I had been using Qt for years- I pretty much knew which files to look in. And my bugs really weren’t anything huge anyway.

On my desktop computer, I have a lot of documents, references, and specs (and I have them copied over to my dev machine as well). After years of bad internet, I have learned that this is a really helpful thing to do. Now if you are a web developer you may be out of luck, but if you do systems-related stuff, doing this is really helpful. If you are on Linux, I also urge you to learn to use the manual system (the “man” command).

Just a thought... 

