Title: On Apps (And Security)...
Date: 2020-07-26 17:45
Category: Opinion

So if you've read below, you will remember how I was talking about our internet completely going out. To follow up on that story, basically here's what happened. The router/modem setup they gave us completely went out (I believe it was some all-in-one kind of thing, but I'm not sure). The service people told us they had cancellations and would send someone out that evening, but it never happened, so we ended up going to a store owned by our ISP and they gave us a whole new router- and told us they stopped using what we had before because they went out a lot. Surprise.

We set everything up, and the new system actually works pretty well- much better than the old actually. While I didn't arc towards complete dislike, my liking went down significantly when I found out the only way to change the router settings was through the ISP's mobile app. Even if you took out the fact that I live with my dad- so obviously he is the ISP customer- the fact that you have to have an app is (in my opinion) completely stupid.

I generally love technology until we get to the consumer side, and even the consumer side doesn't bother me much until we hit the mobile arena. There definitely seems to be a sentiment that we need an app for everything- I guess it makes sense, phones are basically our companions- we are on them all the time, so why not just make an app? In some cases, maybe so. But an app to manage your router? Seriously?

The logic behind using smartphones for things like this, as well as others such as two-factor authentication, payments, and so forth is that most people always have their phone with them- and that makes it secure and verifies identity. To an extent, I think that's true. But a phone is a small device, easily lost or stolen. And unless you have multiple mobile devices, it creates a single point of failure. This is exactly why I don't use two-factor authentication, or any service that I can't also use on my computers. Consider two factor authentication. I only use it for one thing, and that's only because I have no choice. I have many accounts that I could use with two factor authentication, but choose not too. Why? Because I don't want that single point of failure. If I lose my phone, or if it gets stolen, true it would be difficult for someone to get in, but the fact that its gone will make it hard for me to get back into my accounts. I am not opposed to using my phone as a secondary form of verification (ie, those text messages with a code), but I will not allow it to be the deciding factor regarding whether I get into my accounts.

This goes back to my router- once you are solely dependent on one device, you are creating a single point of failure. If I have a real need to get into my router, I can't unless I get my dad to let me in (I have actually needed to for my job- long story). And if something happened to his phone, that creates a single point of failure for him.

And I honestly, I think we can take this even deeper. I am not opposed to smartphones, but I am opposed to the way they are used. The fact that your phone is "smart" should be a feature, not a requirement. Two-factor authentication makes a smartphone a requirement. Text verification makes it a feature- dumb flip-phones can make use of text verification. My personal smartphone use is pathetic- it really is. I literally only have text, phone, an internet messaging service, maps, a notepad, and the camera. I don't even have a web browser (I actually do, but its disabled so I can't get on it as easily). I could seriously get by perfectly fine with a dumb phone (the internet messaging service isn't even a requirement- I use it with one friend whose phone number I have and use... Its a long story).

As I said, I do not find mobile technology one of the better parts of the technology field. Don't get me wrong, a device that functions as phone, music player, camera, notepad, and GPS is great- I make use of that. Ten years ago, I would have had to have several devices to do that. Its the constant companion model that companies encourage and even push (the router for instance) on us that's wrong.

Alright, I think that's enough on that. I'm sorry if this didn't seem too coherent... I was trying not to write a book :)

