Title: My No-Internet Saturday
Date: 2021-06-13 16:57
Category: Self-Improvement

Yesterday, I decided to take a digital sabbath. Although my new job fortunately doesn’t require me to be on the internet all day- I can actually get blocks completely disconnected in- I still feel burned out, so to speak, after a week of use. And this is especially true if I fall down an internet rabbit hole (you know, one of those two-second searches that become two hours….)

By the end of this past week, I really needed a break, so when I finished things up for the day on Friday, I went and locked up my internet stuff in my car- a location sufficiently out of reach for me to make a quick, impulsive check not worth it.

And the result: Yesterday was great, and I didn’t even miss it all that much.

### How I Disconnected

I still live with my family, so turning off the router is not a practical solution. And even if it was, I still do some things like stream music, use Google Docs on my tablet, and other stuff that isn’t distracting and requires the internet. My harmful internet use tends to come from the computers, not the mobile devices.

I have a laptop and a desktop. The desktop is easy. I have it hardwired to the router, with a switch in between. To stay disconnected, I just pulled the power cord out of the switch. The laptop was a little more challenging. Starting last year, I wanted the ability to disconnect and work offline on my laptop as well as the desktop. Simply turning off the internet on the OS doesn’t work. It's too easy to turn back on. So, I ordered an external wifi adapter, and went into the BIOS and turned off the internal chip (which isn’t great anyway). I eventually want to take the chip out, but for the moment this works well.

To enforce my digital time off, I simply take the power cord and the wifi adapter, and lock both in the car.

### The Day

As I said, the day was really nice. I really didn’t miss it, nor did I find I needed it that much. In my free time, I’ve been working on a new programming project. I downloaded all the documentation locally, so I could do everything I needed offline. I made a lot of progress on the said project yesterday as a result.

Productivity aside, I felt peaceful more than anything. When you are checking tons of stuff and idly surfing, it becomes easy to get anxious. At least I do. Having a day off from that was really nice. And it turned out there really wasn’t anything crucial that I needed to do.

### A Note on Digital Sabbaths

I would like to note two things though on the idea of “digital sabbaths”.

First of all, if you’re trying to improve your internet habits, taking a day off and resuming your normal habits the rest of the week isn’t going to solve anything, just as exercising only one day a week isn’t really going to do much. In order to make a positive improvement, you have to regularly schedule disconnected time into your days. This is something I’m still working on, so I’ll go into more detail later.

Secondly, taking the nuclear approach of turning the router off probably isn’t too practical either. I use my tablet for reading and writing projects- specifically, Google Docs and Google Books. While both have offline modes, they are easiest with the internet, and since I don’t have a browser on the tablet anyway, it's not a source of distraction. The same goes with my phone. I have productivity tools, music streaming, and other things that work best with the internet. However, I also don’t have a browser, email, or anything else distracting on it.

These are meant to be examples of when having the internet is useful- the whole idea behind digital minimalism, which a digital sabbath falls under. Digital minimalism isn’t about eliminating the internet from your life; it's about using it mindfully.

### Conclusion

Most of us spend the week connected to the internet- something especially true since the advent of covid. If you’re trying to gain better control over your digital life, I encourage you to try this. You may receive a pleasant surprise with the results!



