Title: New Things
Date: 2021-06-06 09:30
Category: None

Once again it's been a while… I didn’t realize I had let my blog go through May without an update. Oh well. It's been busy the past month with life and personal stuff, some of which I’ll share.

### Another School Year…

Another school year has come and gone. I just finished my junior year, which means I have only one more year left of undergraduate. I think I could have finished a semester early, but I wanted to focus on my internship, and there really isn’t a need. I need some extra credits anyway, so I decided to enroll in French 1 and 2 for my final year.

It’s kind of surreal in a way to be done with yet another year. And to make it even more surreal, almost half my college time has been online thanks to covid (online degree… lol). Academically it’s been nice- as far as grades go, this has been my best year. Everything is coming back to normal, which I’m looking forward to.

### A New Job

If you’ve seen my resume, last year I worked for the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. I really enjoyed the whole lab experience, so I decided to do the same again this year. However, for various reasons, I switched labs, this time going to the Los Alamos National Laboratory (yep, the place where they built the atomic bomb). It’s only week three, but so far it’s been an enjoyable experience. I am doing some work on the LANL fork of Clang/LLVM, which is a lot of fun.

Like anyone in the compiler field, I’ve been familar with LLVM, but being the type of person that likes to torture myself (using a very good friend’s words here), I always wrote my compilers completely from scratch- frontend and backend. And I do really like writing backends. However, after working with LLVM, I want to say it’s so awesome.

### New Projects

Because I haven’t received the covid vaccine yet, I still have sufficient time to do some fun side projects. In the past few months, I’ve been making an effort to break out of the programming space and explore other areas. Don’t get me wrong, I love programming, but it's good and healthy to have a variety of hobbies.

Nevertheless, I have started on yet another compiler project. It's not public yet since it's in the early stages, but it is past that initial point where it will either become a project or get abandoned. It’s a new compiler written in C++ to help me learn LLVM, partly for my job and partly because I really like it. At the moment, it’s a rewrite of the Ida compiler I spent the tail end of last year working on. So far, it’s going really well. I still wrote the frontend from scratch, and I would like to say it has my best expression parser yet.

As for my non-programming projects, my main things have been reading, languages, and some writing. The reading honestly has been self-help stuff lately, but still, it’s been good reading. I’ll come back to that in another post. The languages have taken two forms. Because I’m taking French this fall, I’ve been working to get a start on that over the summer. It's been really enjoyable. Learning Esperanto at the beginning of the year was helpful. The second form, being the nerd that I am, I’ve been exploring constructed languages. I created a simple one, and I’m working on the second version now. Finally, with writing, I’m still trying to keep this site up, and I started doing some creative writing as well.

### Conclusion

I have some outlines down for more things to write about, so hopefully I’ll be able to keep this site up through the coming months. There will still be plenty of tech, but I will probably start branching out into other areas. Stay tuned!

