Title: It Has Been a While...
Date: 2021-04-20 19:47
Category: Opinion

It has been a while since I hosted here. Honestly, its been a while since much of anything post-worthy has happened. I've been busy with school and my spring semester job, so the time of interesting side projects has been small. Not to mention a number of personal things... But the semester is slowing down, and I've been working on some new things.

## Ida

First bit of news, my Lila language got renamed to Ida. There were personal reasons behind this, but also some more technical reasons, as well as based on future thoughts. I've kind of shelved the project for the time being.

For those of you who may be curious, here is why: I dove into compilers back in fall of 2019, and let me be clear, I *love* this field. However, I've been doing compiler project after compiler project almost constantly since this time, and I'm trying to find some different things to try my hand on. Additionally, I'm getting ready to start a job that will allow me to utilize my compiler knowledge, so I'm not sure how beneficial it will be for me to do compilers as a day job, then something else on the side. Maybe it is, but I want a different challenge to play with. Therefore, I'm shelving my compilers for the time being, and working on other projects, which I will publish in due time.

## CppEditor

CppEditor got a few updates. Mainly it was some needed fixes, but I also added a feature where it will help you match opening and closing brackets/braces/etc for certain languages. For those of you who don't love this feature, you have the option of disabling.

## Languages

No, I'm not talking about programming languages. I'm talking about real languages. One of my goals for a long time has been to learn a foreign language. Because I have a light senior year, I'm going to try my hand at French. In the meantime, I'm trying to get a little bit of a start by learning and practicing some each day.

I'm also working on learning Esperanto. In the near future, I plan to write a more detailed post on Esperanto, but for those of you who don't know what it is, it is a constructed international auxiliary language. The grammar is extremely easy, and once you have that down, picking up the words is relatively straightforward, especially if your native language is a European language (which includes English). Learning Esperanto is supposed to help you once you learn another language, and besides, the ideas behind it are really cool.

## Self-Improvement

I've been kind of on a self-improvement binge lately. Or maybe I shouldn't call it a binge, its more like a journey (because anyone who thinks it isn't clearly hasn't done it...). The main element to this is fitness, but I've also been trying a few other things like meditation. I've also been experimenting with some new daily schedules and planning tools. I'll have to write about some of this.

Keeping up with this site is one of my goals, and hopefully I'll be able to. Stay tuned!

