Title: Self Improvement in 2021
Date: 2021-04-25 08:30
Category: Improvement

Time to switch gears here! Today I'm going to drift out of the technology area into a more personal area.

As tough as 2020 was, it was good in that the lockdowns, and "forced winters" (I forget where I saw this term...) were really self-revealing. For me, fall 2020 especially was so, largely due to do some personal issues. Because it seemed likely that the whole covid situation would continue at least through the first half of 2021, even with the vaccines, I wanted to use the remaining time to really make some improvements.

I've never really liked the whole "New Year Resolution" thing. Basically, it means setting a difficult if not unattainable goal at one of the busiest times of year and carrying it for a few weeks before you bomb out and feel bad about yourself. Near the end of 2020, I stumbled across a Reddit post where someone addressed this very thing. I took a slight twist on it, which I would like to share.

Also, before I get into it, this isn't something you have to wait till next year to do. You can start at any point, and you can adjust as needed. The reason I'm sharing is I wanted to make sure I would stay with it, and I have for almost four months now (a quarter of year), so I think it's safe to share.

### The Idea

The idea is simple. You pick one thing you want to address- whether a habit you want to form or break- and then work on that habit for one month. Each month of the year will have a specific habit. My twist on this is not to focus on one specific thing, but to choose a category of a few very inter-related things. Granted, it depends on what you're trying to do- some months it may be better to do only one thing- but I think its slightly counter-productive to do only one thing.

To keep track, I use a journal; at the beginning of each month, I set up a table and just put a check when if I have accomplished the goal.

### What Should I Choose?

Good question. Actually, you may be thinking "oh one for each month? That's easy!". Maybe, but I found its actually not. There's 12 months. When you start writing it all down, you may be having some trouble as you get near the end of the year.

I'm not going to say what you should and shouldn't choose, but I will say for the first month to pick something easy- something you are already doing and just want to make a permanent habit. That way, it will make this stick and make it easier for you tackle and track harder goals in the coming months. For example, in January I chose "Sleep and Hygiene". Obviously, I was already doing this, but my bed and wake-up times were kind of all over the place, as were some hygiene habits. I just wanted to solidify this.

I won't go into great detail for obvious reasons, but here are my goals as of right now (past/present):

- January- Sleep & Hygiene
- February- Order (Make sure place is cleaned up & next day planned)
- March- Technology (didn't work out- see next section) -> Became exercise
- April- Mental Health 1
- May- Mental Health 2
- June- Work/life balance
- July- Deep Work
- August- Personal
- September/October- Social (slight differences)
- November- gave myself two options
- December- Reading

### Addressing Fluidity

Despite your best intentions, things might not work out one month, or you may look at a goal and be like "why did I choose X for month Y???".

Going back to my list above: January and February worked out really well- those habits have stuck for the most part. March was meant to be focusing on addressing some of my tech problems that everyone else probably also has (no offense :) ), but it didn't work out for mainly practical reasons. Additionally, April was meant to be focused on exercise, but I actually started that in late February, so March actually became more about the exercise even though I didn't track it.

Near the end of March, I re-arranged everything. And its okay to do that, I feel if anything it has added to the overall experience. The circumstances were different near the end of March when I re-arranged than back in January when I first planned this. And like I said, March ended up being a stressful month, and the goal I chose, while something I want to address, was not attainable at that time.

### Does it Work?

I think it does. The whole idea behind this is to still challenge yourself, but still make easy and practical enough that you can do it. Have you ever heard of SMART goals? It stands for "Specific", "Measurable", "Achievable", "Relevant", and "Time Bound". Let us go through this. I'm going to use exercise as an example.

- Specific-> If I just wrote "exercise", what does that mean? A walk? The gym? Be specific. For me, this meant a daily run.
- Achievable-> If I wrote "go to the gym", I would have failed. There are no gyms near me, and besides with covid, even if they are not locked down, its probably not the best time to be going. However, the neighborhood I live in is big enough to get a decent run in (I measured 4 miles with two laps), and it only takes 30-40 minutes. That is an achievable goal.
- Relevant-> The "Why". Why am I doing this? I sit on my ass in front of a computer most of the day, which isn't overly healthy physically or mentally.
- Time-bound-> I don't think I have to explain this.

I will say when you start this, you will actually be forcing yourself into two habits: the habits you chose for that month, and the habit of actually keeping track. The best advice I can give is put the table in a place where you will remember to record it. In my case, the journal worked really well. Recently I've switched to a digital tracker, but I'll save that for another post.

### Conclusion

If you've been wanting to make some improvements, I encourage you to try this method. There's no one right way, and I've found it to be very motivating.

