Title: New Projects and Why I Open Up Everything
Date: 2021-03-02 07:34
Category: Opinion

Yesterday, I opened up four projects I had sitting around in private Github repositories. Except for "tiny-cpu", which I started this past weekend, all the others I initially started back in January. Originally, I wasn't going to make them public immediately, but I decided to do so (and got around to doing it yesterday).

### The Projects

* `tiny-cpu`: I'm very interested in computer hardware and digital design, and I'm taking a class in computer architecture, so this is my first attempt at designing a simple CPU. At the time of writing, the register file, decoder, and part of the control unit are working. The CPU is written in VHDL.

* `ada-asm`: This was part of another experiment. I really like Ada, and I wanted to see if I could generate structured binary files with it like in C. It turns out you can both easily and safely. The only thing interesting this does is generate a simple relocatable ELF, but hey that's pretty interesting.

* `tsh`: A simple Unix shell I wrote to learn more about C and Linux processes.

* `codepad`: A work-in-progress text editor I wrote to also learn C, but also to learn more about Gtk. It uses Gtk and GtkSourceView, and at the time of writing, it can do the basic new-open-save of a text editor.

### Why I Open Up Everything

I've people comment on my Github profile and the amount of stuff on there. I mean, compared to some other people, its really not _that_ much, but it is approaching 50 projects. And I also tend to make projects public well before they are useful. Why?

Four reasons.

First of all, most of these projects are for the sake of learning. Other than a few of my compiler/programming-language projects, none of them are anything super unique. If anything, its almost re-inventing the wheel. If you wish to become good at programming, I argue this is the best way to do so. Make a clone of an existing application, but at the same time make it at least somewhat useful. This has helped me so much, in some cases more than classes, and in other cases as extensions of classes.

Secondly, I like teaching others. I've used my projects in the past to show things to people, and they've often been helpful. When I say this, I don't mean like I'm some genius. There are many people much smarter than me out there. No, I mean this in the sense that I've figured out how to do something, and I want to share it with others who either have similar interests, or are also learning (or both).

Third, I believe that the best work (I'm speaking generally here) is done in an open environment. That is what Github is- an open environment (and this isn't meant to be a Github advertisement. I have a Gitlab account as well). If you publish your work in an environment like this, you can see what other people are working on and what ideas they've had, and apply it to your own. And because of the nature of open source, in many cases you can extend the ideas you find to your own. Or go back and contribute to them.

Finally, from a career perspective, having a Github profile like this is very, very helpful. I speak this out of experience, because its helped me a lot. Github acts as a second resume for me. It shows that I really love and am passionate about what I do. It also shows skill and what I know and am interested in.

### And That Said...

If you're an aspiring developer, you should really consider doing this. Or even if you are a developer, open source is very much the way to go.
