Title: Static Hosting
Date: 2020-08-04 12:04
Category: Blogging

Static sites are somewhat of a new thing for me. I wrote about this a little bit a few weeks ago, but I'm going to write more primarily as guidance for others interested in inexpensive blogging.

Back when I was originally trying to blog, I was using Wordpress (like everyone else...). Don't get me wrong, I love Wordpress, but the reason I stopped was money. I originally had hosting for my first year, but when it renewed it went up a lot from what it originally was. Now granted, it was probably my fault since I'm sure it was spelled out and I just didn't read it. Regardless, it pretty much came down to paying a lot for decent hosting or cheaping out and hopefully getting something decent- if I wanted to keep Wordpress.

That's why I'm now doing static hosting. I'm using Pelican as my content generator, and its actually quite nice once you learn how to use it. Hosting was more of a challenge. Originally, I was using surge.sh, which is really nice until it you get to custom domains. Custom domains are free, but HTTPS is not. I tried it, but my wake-up call came yesterday when I switched desktop computers and Firefox gave me all kind of certificate warnings about the site which rightly would scare people off. So, I decided to switch.

A slight downside to static blogging is unlike Wordpress, you are responsible for the posts and making sure they get backed up and saved. Using Git is a really good solution for this. Not that it matters, I kind of preferred to keep this stuff in a private repository, which meant I kept it on Gitlab (I have Github and Gitlab accounts- Github for the important public stuff, and Gitlab for my smaller private stuff). This is where the static hosting comes in. Github and Gitlab both have a static site feature- basically, you can create a free static site based from your repository. I've personally found Gitlab to be a lot nicer. You can create your website from a private repository and it seems to offer a higher level of configuration (all based on the free plan by the way). Now granted, I didn't look into Github much deeper after I noticed you can create the site from a private repo in Gitlab, but you cannot in Github. Setup was really easy, as was pointing my custom domain to it.

Even if you're not overly technical, learning just enough Git to do this is easy. If you are, it should be no trouble at all. As far as cost goes- which is a big benefit to static hosting- all I paid for was my domain name which was like $10 I think. If you're a blogger on a budget, this is something to think about.



