Title: Journey Through Distro Land
Date: 2021-02-20 18:54
Category: Linux

I spent a good part of today trying out different Linux distros on my lab machine, a Dell XPS desktop. Because I spent quite a bit of time on my computers (sometimes not entirely by choice...), when I need a change, switching my Linux distros is one of the best starting points. And even with that aside, knowing different distros is a good learning experience.

Linux Mint has consistently been my most used distro for the past six years. I tend to always come back to that. Linux Mint is based on Ubuntu, and has a very pretty, functional user interface. Its absolutely rock solid, and I like how the developers follow a "when-its-ready", but still regular enough release cycle.

However, I find that Linux Mint isn't always the best for development because the packages are often outdated. I mean, its usable for the vast majority of purposes, but there are times it becomes a real annoyance to me. For a while, I used Manjaro, which is also rather rock solid and very nice to use. It uses a rolling release cycle, which means you always have the latest packages. However, for reasons I will discuss below, I tend to use Fedora as my development distro. Fedora tends to have the latest packages, and is equally as rock solid and stable.

My Dell XPS, while being my lab machine, is also my archive and office machine. I have three drives, an M.2, an SSD, and a 1 TB regular hard drive. I really don't like using regular hard drives for development of any kind, and on second thoughts I didn't want to keep records and pictures on my laptop, so I use this to store stuff. The other two drives are development. So dual booting is an essential requirement (or is it tri-booting I guess...).

### OpenSUSE

I've heard very good things about OpenSUSE, and I've used it a long time ago, though never in depth. I really wanted to try it, but I never got past the LiveCDs. One of them did boot and look really nice, but as a whole they gave me nothing but grief. The first time I tried it, it took _forever_ to boot, and when it finally did, it was slow as hell. The other booted the first time, and looked rather nice, but for some reason never booted again.

I don't know, maybe I should have just installed it and tried it out, but the LiveCD experience was a significant turnoff.

### Solus

Solus looks really, really nice. I like the Budgie desktop and the fact its rolling release. I did actually install it, only to find out that in EFI mode, it doesn't use Grub (and there's no option as far as I'm aware to enable it). I have a rule that Linux Mint is the booting distro, so if it doesn't work from Linux Mint, its out.

Its too bad. Solus looks very promising. Maybe I'll try it on my laptop...

### ElementaryOS

I didn't do this on my desktop, but I installed it earlier in the week on my laptop. I have to say I really love this.

In a lot of ways its similar to Linux Mint in that its based on Ubuntu with its own desktop environment. As a result, it looks really nice and is stable and compatible with most stuff. The downsides are the same though: older packages. With ElementaryOS, I'm not sure of their release cycle yet, it follows the "when-ready" approach which I think is good, but it there doesn't seem to be a pattern. Maybe I'm wrong. Hopefully they get the Ubuntu 20 -based version before long.

ElementaryOS by design looks and feels like MacOS, which is a nice change for someone who generally lives by Windows-like interfaces.

### Manjaro

I've used Manjaro many times in the past, and I _love_ it. Its based on Arch Linux, and therefore follows the rolling-release model. Its seems more bleeding-edge than Solus, but I've never had any stability issues with it (at the same time though, I would never use it as my archive OS). I've never used it much on my desktop, but quite a lot on the laptop. Manjaro is really fast, and comes with the widest selection of desktops I've seen.

The problem is that it won't boot from the Linux Mint bootloader; it just hangs. At some point I may break down and just have to use it, but for now that is a sufficient annoyance for me not to use it.

### GhostBSD and FreeBSD

I know, I know, this isn't Linux. I've always been intrigued with the other non-Unix systems, and BSD is no exception. The only problem is that I have yet to own a machine it actually works on.

When I say "actually works", its always booted and installed on the machines I've had, but there's always a network driver or graphics error that requires more sysadmin skills than I honestly have the patience for. At the end of the day, I'm programmer and like working with interesting problems, and sysadmin is neither. That's why I use these beginner distros like Linux Mint: they just work. I've actually had more luck with Solaris than the BSDs.

### Conclusion

This wasn't meant to be all negative. As you can see, two hits (Solus and ElementaryOS), two flops (*BSD and OpenSUSE), and one kind of both (Manjaro). For now I'm probably going to just stick to Fedora. I don't love how Fedora is a short-term point release, but its rock solid, everything works with it, and its recent enough to be a good development tool.

